Today I Learn, 200124

## And Today I Have Thoughts:

- I have no idea why the course 'introduction to mathematical thinking' is so fun for me. I don't think this course will be free and easy till the end, but I feel sure it will be fun.

- "Real math takes time"

## And Today I Read:

- [What is mathematics?](https://d3c33hcgiwev3.cloudfront.net/_9c059607dd356dedbb3544de6a53a078_Background_Reading.pdf?Expires=1643241600&Signature=ayejcMlC43QD5eW3nvQTbH3IWFrcoprcfcyrryvM20Enahpw2vWoDIFb6GFqU0L3qzyzQryGQtOoJClP8LHsRPdlKzJMdml2TKdJeVrnUHvZ496rsrH4WHGjHehIzmhk3YFzL0zWyf~p0OVIC1wJmBpcUnbOGKaLmf-6NQ-irFk_&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLTNE6QMUY6HBC5A) by Keith Devlin (7 pages)



---





# Introduction to Mathematical Thinking

https://www.coursera.org/learn/mathematical-thinking

- The secret to this entire course is <u>reflection, not completion</u>.

- Real math takes time.



### "Math as the science of patterns"

- Arithmetic and number theory study the patterns of number and counting.
- Geometry studies the patterns of shape.
- Calculus allows us to handle patterns of motion.
- Logic studies patterns of reasoning.
- Probability theory deals with patterns of chance.
- Topology studies patterns of closeness and position.
- Fractal geometry studies the self-similiarity found in the natural world.



## QUIZ!



**What was the first use of numbers?**

- Money



**What kinds of patterns are studied in topology?**

- Closeness



**In the 19th century, the primary focus in mathematics became?**

- Concepts and relationships - 'revolution from Germany'



**According to Keith Devlin, the most valuable mathematical ability in today's advanced nation is?**

- Adapt old methods or develop new ones



**Which of the following was a major change in the nature of mathematics in the 19th century? Select all that apply.**

- Mathematics became more abstract.

- The main focus mathematics shifted from developing and using procedures to analyzing properties and relationships.





## Getting precise about language

Bad language

- **One American dies of melanoma almost every hour.**

Good language

- **Almost every hour, an American dies of melanoma.**





**What is the primary means to determine the truth of a claim in mathematics? Choose one.**

- Proof



Other bad languages

- July is a summer month.

- Sisters reunited after ten years in checkout line at Safeway.

- Large hole appears in High Street. City authorities are looking into it.

- Mayor says bus passengers should be belted.



### Human languages are imperfect in nature, so we use context and background knowledge to clarify the ambiguity.



### However relying on context and background knowledge can't be forgiven in Mathematics world.



### Therefore, mathematical statements use language in a highly restricted way.



**Mathematic statements**

- Object a has property P.

- Every object of type T has property P.

- There is an object of type T having property P.

- If statement A, then statement B.



**Key language terms**

- and

- or

- not

- implies

- for all

- there exists



**The subject know as formal logic was first studied by which ancient civilization?**

- The Greeks
