Today I Learn, 2022.01.28

## And Today I Have No Question

- back to the basic, back to the definitions!





# Introduction to Probability

### random process

- In a random process, we know what outcomes could happen, but we don't know which particular outcome will happen.
  
  - coin toss, dice roll, nasdaq



probability, P(A), 0<=P(A)<=1



### frequentist interpretation

- The probability of an outcome is **the proportion of times the outcome would occur** if we observed the random process an infinite number of times.



### bayesian interpretation

- A Bayesian interprets probability as a **subjective degree of belief**

- Largely popularized by revolutionary advance in computational technology and methods during the last twenty years



### law of large numbers

- law of large numbers states that as more observations are collected, the proportion of occurrences with a particular outcome converges to the probability of that outcome

- Common misunderstanding of law of large numberse: gamber's fallacy (law of averages)





## Disjoint Events + General Addition Rule

- disjoint events

- the general addition rule

- sample space

- probability distributions

- complementary events





### disjoint (mutually exclusive)

**disjoint (mutually exclusive)** events cannot happen at the same time.

- the outcome of a single coin toss cannot be a head and a tail

- a studnet can't both fail and pass a class

- a single card drawn from a deck cannot be an ace and a queen

- P(A and B) = 0



**non-joint** events can happen at the same time

- a student can get A from course a and B from course b.



### union of disjoint events

- What is the probability of drawing a Jack or a three from a well shuffled full deck of cards?
  
  - P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B)
  
  - P(J or 3) = P(J) + P(3) = 4/52 + 4/52 



### union of non-disjoint events

- P(J or red) = P(J) + P(red) - (P and red) = 4/52 + 26/52 - 2/52

- P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A and B)
  
  - General addition rule (for disjoint and non-disjoint)



### sample space

- a sample space is a collection of all possible outcomes of a trial



### probability distributions

- a probability distribution lists all possible outcomes in the sample space, and the probabilities with which they occur.



**Rules for prob. dist**

1. the events listed must be disjoint

2. each probability must be between 0 and 1

3. the sum of probabilities = 1



### complementary events

- complementary events are **two mutually exclusive events whose probabilities add up to 1**.



### disjoint vs. complementary

- sum of prob. of two disjoint outcomes -> not always 1

- sum of prob. of two complementary outcomes -> always 1
  
  - complementary -> disjoint (O)
  
  - disjoint -> complementary (X)
