Today I Learn, 2022.01.27

## And Today I Have No Question

- How to get familiar with new programming language? **Think less, code more!**
  
  - Still, it's quite interesting to see the differences between R and Python, especially in apsect of data manipulation approach.



# R Programming_data types



### Matrices

```r
m <- matrix(nrow=2, ncol=3)
m
dim(m)
attributes(m)


m <- matrix(1:6, nrow=2, ncol=3)
m
# column-first assignment
# [,1] [,2] [,3]
# [1,] 1 3 5
# [2,] 2 4 6

# assign values and dimension seperately
m <- 1:10
m # [1] 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

dim(m) <- c(2,5)
m
# [,1] [,2] [,3] [,4] [,5]
# [1,] 1 3 5 7 9
# [2,] 2 4 6 8 10

# cbind, rbind
x <- 1:3
y <- 10:12
cbind(x, y)
#    x y
# [1,] 1 10
# [2,] 2 11
# [3,] 3 12

rbind(x, y)
# x  1  2  3
# y 10 11 12


```



### Factors

Factors are used to represent **categorial data**. Factors can be unordered or ordered. One can think of a factor as an integer where each integer has a label.

-  Factors are treated specially by modeling functions like `lm()` and `glm()`

- Using factors with labels is better than using integers because factors are self-describing;
  
  - **having a variable that has values "Male" and "Female" is better than a variable that has values 1 and 2.**
  
  - Easy to understand and prevent confusing or misunderstanding.

```r
x <- factor(c("yes", "yes", "no", "yes", "no"))
x
# [1] yes yes no yes no
# Levels: no yes

table(x)
# x
# no yes
# 2 3

unclass(x)
# [1] 2 2 1 2 1

attr(,"levels")
# [1] "no" "yes"
```



The order of the levels can be set using the `levels` argument to `factor()`. 

- This can be **important in linear modeling** becuase the **first level is used as the baseline level**.

```r
x <- factor(c("yes", "yes", "no", "yes", "no"),
            levels = c("yes", "no"))
x
# [1] yes yes no yes no
# Levels: yes no
```



### Missing Values

Missing values are denoted by `NA` or `NaN` for undefined mathematical operations.

- `is.na()` is used to test objects if they are `NA`

- `is.nan()` is used to test for `NaN`

- `NA` values have a class also, so there are integer `NA`, character `NA`, etc.

- **A `NaN` value is also `NA` but the converse is not true**



```r
x <- c(1, 2, NA, 10, 3)
is.na(x)
# [1] FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE

is.nan(x)
# [1] FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE

x <- c(1, 2, NaN, NA, 4)
is.na(x)
# [1] FALSE FALSE TRUE TRUE FALSE

is.nan(x)
# [1] FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE



```



### Data Frames

Data frames are used to store tabular data

- They are represented as a **special type of list where every element of the list has to have the same length**

- Each element of the list can be thought as a column and the length of each element of the list is the number of rows

- Unlike matrices, data frames can **store different classes of objects in each column** (just like lists): matrices must have every element be the same class

- Data frames also have a special attribute called `row.names`

- Data frames are usually created by calling `read.table()` or `read.csv()`

- Can be converted to a matrix by calling `data.matrix()`



```r
x <- data.frame(foo = 1:4, bar = C(T, T, F, F))
x
#   foo bar
# 1 1 TRUE
# 2 2 TRUE
# 3 3 FALSE
# 4 4 FALSE

nrow(x) # [1] 4
ncol(x) # [1] 2


```



### Names

R objects can also have names, which is very useful for writing readable code and self-describing objects.

```r
x <- 1:3
names(x) # NULL

names(x) <- c("foo", "bar", "norf")
x
# foo bar norf
# 1  2  3

names(x)
# [1] "foo" "bar" "norf"
```



List and matrix can also have names.

```r
x <- list(a = 1, b = 2, c = 3)
x
# $a
# [1] 1

# $b
# [1] 2

# $c
# [1] 3



m <- matrix(1:4, nrow=2, ncol=2)
dimnames(m) <- list(c("a", "b"), c("c", "d"))
m

#   c d
# a 1 3
# b 2 4
```



### Summary (data types)

Data types

- atomic classes: numeric, logical, character, integer, complex

- vectors, lists

- factors

- missing values

- data frames

- names





## Reading/writing Tabular Data

A few principal functions reading data into R

- `read.table`, `read.csv` for reading tabular data
  
  - `write.table`

- `readLines` for reading lines of a text file
  
  - `writeLines`

- `source` for reading in R code files (inverse of `dump`)
  
  - `dump`

- `dget` for reading in R code files (inverse of `dput`)
  
  - `dput`

- `load` for reading in saved workspaces
  
  - `save`

- `unserialize` for reading single R objects in binary form
  
  - `serialize`



### Reading Data Files with `read.table`

`read.table` function is one of the most commonly used functions for reading data. It has a few important arguments:

- `file` - the name of a file, or a connection

- `header` - logical indicating if the file has a header line

- `sep` - a string indicating how the columns are seperated

- `colClasses` - a character vector indicating the class of each column in the dataset

- `nrows` - the number of rows in the dataset

- `comment.char` - a character string indicating the comment character

- `skip` - the number of lines to skip from the beginning

- `stringAsFactors` - should character variables be coded as factors?



For small to moderately sized datasets, you can usually call `read.table without specifying any other arguments

```r
data <- read.table("foo.txt")
```



R wil automatically

- skip lines that begin with a #

- figure out how many row there are (and how much memory needs to be allocated)

- **figure what type of variable is in each column of the table Telling R all these things directly makes R run faster and more efficiently.**

- `read.csv` is identical to `read.table` except that the default seperator is a comma.







## Reading Large Tables

With much larger datasets, doing the following will make your life easier and will prevent R from choking

- Read the help page for `read.table` which contains many hints

- Make a rough calculation of the memory required to store your dataset.
  
  - If the dataset is larger than the amount of RAM on your computer, you can probably stop right here.
  
  - Set `comment.char = ""` if there are no commented lines in your file.

- Use the `colClasses` argument
  
  - Specifying this option instead of using the default can make `read.table` run **MUCH FASTER**, often twice as fast.
  
  - **In order to use this option, you have to know the class of each column in your data frame.**
  
  - If all of the columns are "numeric", for example, then you can just set `colClasses = "numeric"`.
  
  - A quick and dirty way to figure out the classes of each column is the following:

```r
initial <- read.table("datatable.txt", nrows=100)
classes <- sapply(initial, class)
tabAll <- read.table("datatable.txt", colClasses=classes)
```

- Set `nrows`. This doesn't make R run faster but it helps with memory usage.
  
  - A mid overestimate is okay
  
  - You can use the Unix tool `wc` to calculate the number of lines in a file



### Know Your System

In general, when using R with larger datasets, it's useful to know a few things about your system

- How much memory is available?

- What other applications are in use?

- Are there other uses logged into the same system?

- What operating system?

- Is the OS 32 or 64 bit?



### Calculating Memory Requirements

(Example) I have a data with 1,500,000 rows and 120 columns, all of which are numeric data. Roughly, how much memory is required to store this data frame?



1,500,000 x 120 x 8 bytes/numeric

= 1440000000 bytes

= 1440000000 / 2\*\*20 bytes / MB

= 1,373.29 MB

= 1.34 GB





## Textual Data Formats

- `dump` and `dput` are useful because the **resulting textual format is edit-able**, and in the case of corruption, potentially recoverable.

- Unlike writing out a table or csv file, `dump` and `dput` preserve the *metadata* (sacrificing some readability), so that another user doesn't have to specify it all over again.

- `Textual` formats can work much better with version control programs like subversion or git which can only track changes meaningfully in text files

- Textual formats can be longer-lived; if there is corruption somewhere in the file, it can be easier to fix the problem

- Textual formats adhere to the "**Unix phliosophy**"

- **Downside: The format is not very space-efficient**



### `dput` R objects

Another way to pass data around is by deparsing the R object with `dput` and reading it back in using `dget`



```r
y <- data.frame(a = 1, b = "a")
dput(y)
# structure(list(a=1,
#               b=structure(1L, .label="a",
#                            class="factor")),
#           .Names = c("a", "b"), row.names = c(NA, -1L),
#           class = "data.frame")
dput(y, file="y.R")
new.y <- dget("y.R")
new.y
#   a b
# 1 1 a 
```



### `dump` R objects

Multiple objects can be deparsed using the dump function and read back in using `source`.

```r
x <- "foo"
y <- data.frame(a = 1, b = "a")
dump(c("x", "y"), file = "data.R")
rm(x, y)
source("data.R")
y
#   a b
# 1 1 a

x
# [1] "foo"
```



## Connections: Interfaces to the Outside World

Data are read in using *connection* interfaces. Connectios can be made to files (most comon) or to other more exotic things.

- `file`, opens a connection to a file

- `gzfile` opens a connection to a file compressed with gzip

- `bzfile` opens a connection to a file compressed with bzip2

- `url` opens a connection to a webpage



### File connections

```R
str(file)
function (description = "", open = "", blocking=True,
        encoding = getOption("encoding"))
```

- `description` is the name of the file

- `open` is a code indicating
  
  - "r" - read only
  
  - "w" - writing (and initializing a new file)
  
  - "a" - appending
  
  - "rb", "wb", "ab" - reading, writing or appending in binary mode (Windows)



### Connections

In general, connections are powerful tools that let you navigate files or other external objects. In practice, we often don't need to deal with the connection interface directly.

```R
con <- file("foo.txt", "r")
data <- read.csv(con)
close(con)
```



is the same as 

```R
data <- read.csv("foo.txt")
```



### Reading Lines of a Text file

- `writeLines` **takes a character vector** and writes each element one line at a time to a text file.

- `readLines` can be useful for reading in lines of webpages



```r
con <- gzfile("words.gz")
x <- readLines(con, 10)
x
# [1] "1080" "10-point" "10th" "11-point"
# [5] "12-point" "16-point" "18-point" "1st"
# [9] "2" "20-point"


con <- url("http://jhsph.edu", "r")
x <- readLines(con)

head(x)
# [1] "<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC \"~~~~
# [2] ""
# [3] "<html>"
# [4] "<head>"
# [5] "\t<meta http-equiv=\"Content-Type\" content=\"...
```
